rfc: genpolicy on diverse platforms (#761)
edgelesssys/contrast: rfc/006-genpolicy-platforms.md

# RFC 006: `genpolicy` for diverse platforms

This RFC describes the current situation of `genpolicy` and proposes a strategy for making it work for all supported Contrast platforms.

## Problem Statement

Generated policies are a key building block of Confidential Containers and Contrast.
However, the only implementation that guarantees basic confidentiality levels is the fork maintained by Microsoft.
The upstream Kata policy is lacking security fixes that haven't been backported, and yet lacks a mechanism for ensuring image integrity.
On the other hand, some features that we contributed and would like to use are only available upstream with no ETA of adoption by Microsoft.

We're using the Microsoft fork successfully on AKS-CoCo, but it's tailored to that platform and unlikely to ever be portable.
Portability will become important for our bare-metal efforts, though.

> Bare-metal cluster will diverge from the standardized AKS environment, requiring flexibility in policy generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bare-metal clusters will diverge from the standardized AKS environment, requiring flexibility in policy generation.
```

## Parts of genpolicy

The workload policy mechanism can be divided into four parts:

> * The tool that generates reference values from workload YAML and composes the workload policy (`genpolicy`).

Reviewer: We should then move this point below (as of now) point 3, so that `rules.rego` is introduced first

> * The tool that generates reference values from workload YAML and composes the workload policy (`genpolicy`).

Author: Restructured

* The settings file for the tool (`genpolicy-settings.json`).
* The policy rules themselves (`rules.rego`).
* The policy engine that's queried in the agent.

These components are somewhat independent, and the following subsections describe how they fit together.

### The tool

> The idea of the `genpolicy` tool is to take a set of Kubernetes workload descriptors and derive the Kata agent API requests that a legitimate runtime would issue to spawn these workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea of the `genpolicy` tool is to take a set of Kubernetes workload descriptors and derive the Kata agent API requests that a legitimate runtime would issue to spawn, stop, and communicate with these workloads.
```
nit: it doesn't only spawn the workloads, does it?

Author: True, let me just write _manage_.

Reviewer: brilliant!

> It appends these anticipated requests as data to the rules file to produce a complete policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It appends rules that allow exactly and only these anticipated requests to the rules file to produce a complete policy.
```

Author: This is not true - there are request objects (or, parts of them) literally appended to the rules. Let me try if I can make that clearer.

> Guessing the transformations from Kubernetes to CRI is easy because it's somewhat stable, and the path from Kata runtime to the agent is under our control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guessing the transformations from Kubernetes to CRI is easy because it's somewhat stable, and the path from Kata runtime to the agent is under our control.
```
I don't really get this. What does it mean?

Author: Let me try to explain this better.

The container image integrity is verified by calculating `dm-verity` hashes of the layer tarballs and including these in the container reference values.

### The settings

Settings are designed to model behavior that's dependent on the environment or specific to a certain cluster configuration.
For example, a newer containerd might inject `sysctl` rules that an older one didn't, or a cluster administrator might want to mount devices (like GPUs) with a device plugin.

### The rules

The rules consist of predicates that evaluate to a Boolean decision for all agent service methods.
Broadly generalizing, each rule compares the input request with reference values.
If the input request diverges from expectations, the output is `false` and the request is rejected.

Assuming a relatively stable format of the reference values, the rules can be written independently of the other parts.
For example, if `genpolicy` computes both `dm-verity` hashes for tardev layers and includes the corresponding pinned images, rules can be written to accommodate both the tardev-snapshotter and any guest-pull mechanism.

### The agent

> The functionality in the agent is very simple: an in-memory policy engine is equipped with the incoming policy, and subsequent agent requests are subject to policy validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The functionality in the agent is very simple: an in-memory policy engine is equipped with the incoming policy, and subsequent agent requests are subject to policy validation. The agent starts from a default policy that's available in the UVM image.
```

We can accelerate progress by porting necessary changes ourselves.
Also, contributions from Contrast can ensure that the tool becomes flexible enough to support our use cases.

### Prepare to maintain patches

We would like to support a mix-and-match of snapshotters and target platforms, but the CoCo community consensus is to focus on one.
Thus, it's likely that Contrast will need patches, for example for an updated `tarindex` or even the entire `dm-verity` calculation.

### Develop our own rules and settings

Due to the nature of the settings file, Contrast can't rely on a single vendor to provide this.
On the other hand, we don't want to force our users to make modifications for our standard target platforms.
Thus, we develop settings for our known target platforms, validate them through CI and bundle them with the CLI.

The upstream rules should eventually be compatible with all non-tardev platforms.
This is a shared interest throughout the wider CoCo community, but we can accelerate it through contributions.

For the tardev snapshotter platforms (that is, AKS for now), we start with the Microsoft rule set.

> Once the necessary patches grow uncomfortable (for example reference value divergence), we port the missing parts to a patch for the upstream rules.

Reviewer 2: Just for my understanding:
In other words, this means bringing all the msft changes to upstream except the tardev support.
Leaving tardev as the only difference/reason for the existence of the msft fork?

Author: Microsoft has other patches that might not make it upstream, e.g. for their CSI drivers. My idea here is that we would port these so that they _would_ apply to upstream Kata, but apply them in the Contrast build. However,  this may not become necessary if upstream is "compatible enough".

Reviewer 2: Upstream would not accept these patches since they're specific for Azure's CSI-Plugins in this case?
What happens if we support other platforms such as GCP or AWS.
Would we have patches for things such as CSI for all of them?

Author: I'm not sure what Kata's strategy is wrt. insecure volume mounts in confidential containers, but I don't expect it to be a priority and it may thus take considerable time until adoption.

Neither do I think we should make it _our_ priority, because there's just not a good use case that can't be addressed with block storage, which is much easier to check with policies.

## Alternatives considered

### Bundle both Microsoft's and Kata's tool

> While this approach seems easiest on the surface, it's going to explode the size of the CLI binary, which is already significant.

Reviewer: I see the second point, but I think there could be ways around a large CLI (e.g. by sourcing static builds of these tools at runtime, only for the required platform)

Just a note though, not advocating against your proposal
